Now with the filters rendered here of course would be nice to have a safe button here at the top that
allows us to well save any changes to filters we made.
So in the filters screen we already have one header button on header left.
I now also want to have one on header writes on the right of my header so header right here is basically
the same as we have it here so we can just copy this here because we want to have had her buttons there
with one button that will be the safe button and the icon we can use there is for example and of course
you can pick a different one but here I will go with for example safe and now when this is pressed however
that will be a bit tricky of course big fire function.
We could console log saving filters here.
Now the actual logic for saving and applying filters is something we'll take care about in the next
module but still there is some issue with that.
If I save it like this and we go to the filters of course we can press this.
This works but what would be nice is that we then really gather our current state of filters so basically
get a snapshot of our current state here and for the moment locked us to the console in the next module
applied is somehow to filter the recipes we're showing on the other screens notice this might sound
trivial but we'll have a problem here.
Our filters so the information which filters are set that's all stored in D state variables here right.
And that's part of our component.
Our button however isn't a navigation options.
And yes there we get this snap data which for example gives us the navigation prop in the end but what
we don't have here is access to the state of our component and that is what I need here though.
And now this year is really an important pattern which might look like a strange hack or work around
but which is the way of actually communicating between your navigation options and your component.
If you depend on changing data in your component instead of your navigation options so indeed navigation
options you need information about data that changed in your component.
This is also an approach you find in the official box of risk navigation by the way we can use parents
so that thing we pass between screens to communicate between our component and the navigation options.
And this might sound strange but this is exactly what we'll do now.
Let's say here in our component we add a new function and I'll name does function here save filters.
You can name it however you want.
It's a function that takes no arguments but that has one job.
It will treat applied filters constant for example which is an object which gathers our filters.
So there we could have gluten free as a key and we store is gluten free as a value.
We have lactose free as a key and we store our current is lactose free.
State value.
We do the same for vegan with is vegan and we do the same for is veg at Terry end and is vegetarian.
Like that and thereafter I will console lock this applied filters thing.
Now the thing is I would like to give access to dysfunction which is part of my component to my navigation
options so that I can trigger dysfunction from inside the navigation options and for this we can use
parables
let's add use a fact so that we have a way of executing code whenever our state changes because that's
when I want to forward this updated function which basically captures my current state to my navigation
options.
So here I can add use effect and use a fact takes a function which runs whenever our state changed and
whatever the component rendered and in there we can now use props navigation set parents.
We haven't used set parents before.
We only work with get Perrin.
We didn't upset parents because before we only set parents when we navigated to a new screen then for
example as in the categories screen we you passed our parents like this to the new screen but we can
use set parodies to update the parent's values for the currently loaded screen now here on this screen.
We got no parents so it's empty.
Hence we can set parents to a brand new object here and I want to add one entry there but you could
add as many as you want.
I want to add save key and you can take any name for that key which you want and point at safe filters
so at dysfunction I don't execute the function I don't add parentheses.
I just pointed it.
I just use this variable which holds a pointer at this function the end and forward this value so forward.
This pointer or store this pointer to that function in its safe key in that object which analysis as
parents in this screen in the filters screen.
This allows us to go to the navigation options and there we have access to NAV data and data for to
navigation right and that means that here for the safe button when pressing this we can actually use
nav data dot navigation gets param.
That is how we can retrieve a parameter and that's available here navigation options to save and I can
retrieve that save parameter which I'm setting here in use affect and I know it is this super strange
the first time you see this and it looks like a really dirty hack but it is not.
This is a valid way of communicating between your component and your navigation options which you typically
need when having action items in your navigation options.
This will get us access to our parameters and there we access the safe parameter the safe parameter
will be this function and we update the value in that parameter whenever a stage changes and we need
to do this because in this function this is recreated whenever our state changes and it locks in the
latest state values.
And that's of course what we want when does function gets executed eventually with the help of parents
through that button in the navigation options.
So we use parents as a way of communicating between our component and the navigation options.
Kind of a work around but indeed the one you find in the official box as well and the way of how you
communicate here now before we saved is there are two things we need to do though use effect right now
runs whenever just component updates in the end it should only run when safe filters hold a new value
soil at the second argument to use a fact which is this array of dependencies and there is safe filters
so this variable here which holds a function is a dependency.
And right now it is will always rebuild when you component rebuild.
So it's not really a dependency that helps us but we'll soon fix this.
And props also as a dependency now actually to a wide unnecessary re renders whenever anything in the
parent component changes.
All use a different way of extracting my navigation prop I'll use these structuring here like this navigation
equals props.
This is a syntax which uses object D structuring which means props as an object and this pulls out the
navigation key and stories is in a brand new constant of the same name self the same navigation it stores
the value in the navigation prop in that navigation constant.
Now that's what the syntax does and the advantages that we now have a navigation constant here which
we can use and use effect without props because we have to is stored in a separate constant now.
And now we can add this as a dependency which means when this changes does we'll rebuild.
But if anything else in the props changes does will not unnecessarily rerun the effect.
Now to make sure that safe filters only updates when our state changes we can import the use callback
hook from react and no hook built into react.
And this allows us to wrap a function so that this function is actually cached by react and is only
recreated if it's dependencies changed.
We wrap this around our safe filters functions just like this so we pass this function as an argument
to use callback and use callback.
All that takes a second argument which is an array of dependencies and there we need to specify all
the dependencies we have here.
That could change and that would lead us to will recreate that function that essentially is the case
of one of the four states here changes so is gluten free is lactose free is vegan and is vegetarian
are now all dependencies of use callback and that means this component function here will be recreated
if any of these states here changes.
If anything else causes this component to re render will not recreate this function.
And that's in turn important because that save filters function is a dependency of use effect.
So if Dad is recreate it use effect runs again which updates our parents and we want to keep this to
a minimum and not constantly update our parents but really only do that if we need to do it.
With this in place we should now be able to press the save button and see the filters we chose.
So lets go whips to filters here
and now this breaks.
Do you have any idea why it would break.
The problem is I have an immigration year as a dependency and use effect and I explained why I have
it right that I don't want to have props in its entirety ends on a problem chest is when we call sad
parents.
We add new parents to our navigator in the end and what does all this does is it causes navigation to
change.
So in the end I have an infinite loop here.
If I remove navigation here as a dependency then this will work if we now save this.
Now if you close both apps here with the help of the task managers and you then restart that on both
operating systems you'll see that now it is indeed works and you can hit save here go what you'll not
see is the output in the log here.
That however makes a lot of sense because if you have a close look at these safe button in our header
that what I'm doing here in on press is I'm in the end executing this function but what does this do.
It retrieves our parameters saved indie or stored in the safe key.
What is this.
Well that is as mentioned before a pointer at the safe filters function so we retrieve that pointer
if we then don't do anything with that pointer while not doing anything.
That is a pointer at a function so of course we need to execute it like this by adding parentheses.
Alternatively we simply get rid of this anonymous arrow function here and we simply bind on press to
the result of retrieving our point or heater like that because then does pointer at the function will
be executed for us when we press this.
That's the alternative.
So now if we safeties and we therefore let this reload we go back to the filters.
If I hit save here we now see output in the lock the scroll up a bit here.
Everything set to false.
If I now said lactose free and vegetarian to true and I had save we see a number lock and there indeed
vegetarian and lactose free is set to true which is exactly what I have here.
So now that is working let's confirm that it also works on Android by going to filters there as well.
That said lactose free to true and safety is if we do so.
That's our Android output here.
Lactose free is true everything else is false.
So now it has all to works.
So this work around can be a bit tricky to wrap your head around and avoiding this infinite loop here
also is important.
Making sure that you will use callback here too wide unnecessarily unnecessary rebuilds off this function
here also is something you should do so that when you update the parents and therefore this component
rebuilds you don't also rebuild that function and therefore also enter an infinite loop.
But with that we have a way of communicating between component and navigation options which is typically
a pattern you need when you have action items in your action bar and you want to trigger something that
depends on data managed in your component with the help of these buttons.